Title: Auditing and Monitoring of Medication Policy and Procedure
Category: Medications Management
URL: https://app.qcs.co.uk/policy-centre/my-policies/CM16/view-policy

==================================================

Compliance
Audit
Medication
CM16 - Auditing and Monitoring of Medication Policy and Procedure
ALL POLICY
REVIEW SHEET
PURPOSE
SCOPE
OBJECTIVES
POLICY
PROCEDURE
DEFINITIONS
KEY FACTS - PROFESSIONALS
KEY FACTS - PEOPLE AFFECTED BY THE SERVICE
FURTHER READING
OUTSTANDING PRACTICE
FORMS
RESOURCES
Review Sheet
Last Reviewed 10 Feb 25
Last Amended 10 Feb 25
This policy will be reviewed as needs require or at the following interval: Annual
Business Impact:
LOW
Reason for this Review:
Scheduled review
Changes Made:
Yes
Summary:
This policy will support with auditing and monitoring practices. It has been reviewed with no significant changes. References have been checked and updated.
Relevant Legislation:
The Health and Social Care Act 2008 (Regulated Activities) Regulations 2014
Medical Act 1983
Medicines Act 1968
Misuse of Drugs Act 1971
Underpinning Knowledge:
Author: CQC, (2024), Regulation 17: Good governance [Online] Available from: https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/regulations/regulation-17-good-governance [Accessed: 10/02/2025]
Author: CQC, (2023), Good Governance of Medicines [Online] Available from: https://www.cqc.org.uk/guidance-providers/adult-social-care/good-governance-medicines [Accessed: 10/02/2025]
Author: Royal Pharmaceutical Society, (2024), Professional Guidance on the Safe and Secure Handling of Medicines [Online] Available from: https://www.rpharms.com/recognition/setting-professional-standards/safe-and-secure-handling-of-medicines/professional-guidance-on-the-safe-and-secure-handling-of-medicines [Accessed: 10/02/2025]
Author: NICE, (2014), Managing Medicines in Care Homes [Online] Available from: https://www.nice.org.uk/Guidance/SC1 [Accessed: 10/02/2025]
Suggested Action:
Encourage sharing the policy through the use of the QCS App
Equality Impact Assessment:
QCS have undertaken an equality analysis during the review of this policy. This statement is a written record that demonstrates that we have shown due to regard to the need to eliminate lawful discrimination, advance equality of opportunity and foster good relations with respect to the characteristics protected by equality law.
1. Purpose
1.1 To ensure compliance with the medicines policies, legal requirements, best practice, and to ensure that at all times, Registered Nurses and Care Workers are meeting the needs of Residents in relation to medication management.
1.2 This policy should be read with the Overarching Medication Policy and Procedure, and suite of other medication policies and procedures.
1.3 To support Quenby Rest Home in meeting the following Quality Statements:
Key Question
Quality Statements
Key Question
Effective
Quality Statements
QSE1: Assessing needs
QSE2: Delivering evidence-based care & treatment
Key Question
Safe
Quality Statements
QSS8: Medicines optimisation
Key Question
Safe
Quality Statements
QSS1: Learning culture
Key Question
Well-led
Quality Statements
QSW5: Governance, management and sustainability
Key Question
Well-led
Quality Statements
QSW7: Learning, improvement and innovation
1.4 Relevant Legislation
The Health and Social Care Act 2008 (Regulated Activities) Regulations 2014
Medical Act 1983
Medicines Act 1968
Misuse of Drugs Act 1971
2. Scope
2.1 Roles Affected:
Registered Manager
Other management
Nurse
Care staff
2.2 People Affected:
Residents
2.3 Stakeholders Affected:
Commissioners
External health professionals
Local Authority
NHS
3. Objectives
3.1 Quenby Rest Home complies with the policies and procedures for medicines management and can evidence, through audit processes, that the policies and procedures are adhered to by staff.
3.2 There is evidence of continual improvement by analysis of themes and trends with medication practice that are addressed and acted upon in a timely manner.
4. Policy
4.1 Quenby Rest Home understands that monitoring and auditing is an essential part of safe medication management and has the following benefits:
It provides a check for Quenby Rest Home, i.e. "are we actually doing what we think we are doing?"
It helps Quenby Rest Home to implement and sustain improvements in its services
It provides evidence of current practice against national guidelines, regulation and local policy
It provides evidence about the quality of care in a service to establish confidence amongst stakeholders
It helps reduce the risk of errors and creates a learning culture
4.2 Quenby Rest Home understands the importance of ensuring that the 6 Rights of Medication have been followed and that there is a documented audit trail from receipt through to the administration and/or return of all medicines.
4.3 Mr Nithyanand Thirumalaisamy Navaneethakrishnan promotes an open and honest safety culture that supports the safe and secure handling of medicines. This is reinforced by proactive audit and review, and by reporting, sharing, learning and taking action on medication safety incidents.
4.4 Governance
Quenby Rest Home will demonstrate effective governance, assurance and auditing systems and processes; that assess, monitor and drive improvement in:
The quality and safety of the service provided
The quality of the experience for those using the service
Any risk relating to the health, safety and welfare of people using services and others
Mr Nithyanand Thirumalaisamy Navaneethakrishnan will continually evaluate and seek to improve the governance and auditing processes at Quenby Rest Home.
4.5 Good Practice in the Governance of Medicines
CQC (2023) describe this as:
A focus on outcomes for Residents, for example:
Gathering Resident’s views
Finding out how Residents are getting on with their medicines and if they are happy with them
A process for sharing outcomes to promote improvement for Residents
Clear expectations for staff within the medicines policies
Promoting opportunities to share learning both internally and externally
A regular review of medicines processes with records of any actions required
Systems to ensure that required actions are followed up and completed
4.6 The quality assurance system for the safe and secure handling of medicines defines the audit and monitoring processes which are used at Quenby Rest Home to check the standards of practice that are being delivered. A risk-based approach is taken to define the frequency of audit.
Routine audit is undertaken of all key processes and consequent remedial action, including escalation, is taken where necessary.
5. Procedure
5.1 Audit Trail
The Registered Manager must ensure that there is a complete, documented audit trail from the receipt through to the administration and/or return of all medicines.
5.2 Policies and Procedures
Mr Nithyanand Thirumalaisamy Navaneethakrishnan will ensure that policies and procedures for medicines handling are accessible to staff via the app facilities and can evidence through audit that those policies and procedures are adhered to by staff.
5.3 Electronic Systems
If Quenby Rest Home uses an electronic medication system, Mr Nithyanand Thirumalaisamy Navaneethakrishnan must ensure:
They can utilise features available that support quality improvement
They demonstrate how the system supports good governance and improvement
5.4 Audit Design
The audit is designed to evidence that the correct medication is:
Administered to the right person
Via the right route
At the right dose
At the right time
On the right date
Using the right documentation
There must also be evidence through audit of the Resident's informed consent and that the correct procedure has been followed if the Resident refuses their medication.
This system of auditing seeks to identify failures and eliminate medication errors and other medication related risks.
5.5 Medication Management
Audit must also demonstrate that the correct procedures are being followed in all aspects of medication management at Quenby Rest Home, including:
Covert medication
Safe disposal of medication
Ordering and receipt of medication
Storage of medication
Medication away from home
Homely remedies
Controlled drugs
5.6 Audit Schedule
It is the duty of Mr Nithyanand Thirumalaisamy Navaneethakrishnan or designated others to audit all areas in which they work on a weekly, two weekly or monthly basis. The audit schedule will be agreed by Quenby Rest Home and the schedule cascaded to staff.
The audit schedule will be based upon risk with auditing increased at times of change or exceptional concern.
5.7 Audit Tools
The following Audit tools can be found in the Forms section of this policy:
Overarching Medication Audit
Medication Administration Audit
Ordering and Receipt of Medication Audit
Storage of Medication Audit
Homely Remedies Audit
Covert Medication Audit
Controlled Drug Medication Audit
Disposal of Medication Audit
Medication Documentation Audit
High Risk Medications
Medication Stock Check
5.8 Actions
Where areas are identified as requiring remedial action, action plans will be completed, staff will be informed, actions identified and changes embedded in practice.
Where identified, examples of good practice are shared with staff at Quenby Rest Home.
6. Definitions
6.1 Audit
A quality improvement process that seeks to improve care and outcomes through systematic review of care against specific criteria
7. Key Facts - Professionals
Staff may be involved in the audit process as delegated by Mr Nithyanand Thirumalaisamy Navaneethakrishnan
Staff will have access at all times to the QCS app and its suite of medication-related policies and procedures
There will be a well-documented audit cycle that is adhered to
Medication auditing seeks to identify failures and eliminate medication errors and other medication risks
8. Key Facts - People Affected by The Service
Your feedback is valuable and helps us to learn. Any suggestions you have will be listened to and considered
You can be assured that Quenby Rest Home audits and monitors its service in relation to medication management to ensure that it is safe and effective